So how do you feel confident making predictions about a hundred years from now?
Thank you very much.
Well, no one has a perfect crystal ball with regard to the future, but I have tried to bring some structure without methodology and discipline to the art of making technological predictions.
And the predictions I made
in a book I wrote about 12 years ago.
It turned out rather well regarding the 1990s.
That was the age of intelligent machines.
Right.
The next one.
Those are some of the connections I made.
There are several common mistakes that people make
when looking at the future.
Most people, if you ask them about the 21st century, will give you a comment about 2004.
Most people are really hesitant to push the horizons and understand how different the future will be.
One mistake is to only look at one or two trends, and there are many intersecting trends, and they build on each other.
A second one
He is only looking at one or two iterations of progress in a particular trend and then imagining that progress stops and not realizing that one innovation builds on the next.
And the biggest, I think, failure to understand the future is not understanding the exponential nature of time and the accelerating pace of technological progress.
Technology is accelerating.
I talk about that at length in the beginning of the book.
called the law of accelerating returns.
More will happen in the next 20 years than happened in the last 100.
Quite a bit happened in the last 100.
So very often people, I mean, you read about, I mean, and these are scientists or well-known people who talk about it's going to take 100 years for something to happen.
And indeed, in the past, a particular development may have taken 100 years, but it will only take 15 years in the future.
So when you consider the exponential growth
of technology, the enormous power that these very powerful computers will have, the extent to which they're going to be deeply embedded in our society and civilization, all the different intersecting trends from reverse engineering to the human brain, brain scanning, and the growth of computation and progress in all the different fields of research and computer science, et cetera, et cetera.
You put that all together and it has a pretty formidable effect.
The law of accelerating returns does provide
quantitative measure of the kind of progress we can expect at different points in time.
And I talk about, for example, we're able to shrink the size of our technologies by a certain factor each decade.
The growth of computing power per unit cost has been growing at a very predictable rate.
So we can look at different scanning technologies are getting higher resolution and higher bandwidth at a pretty predictable rate.
So we can get a pretty good idea of the kinds of technologies that would be available at different points in time, the kinds of software capabilities that would be feasible.
I've been watching software development for 35 years and have a sense of how quickly progress is made in different fields.
So you put that all together and you can get a picture of what life would be like, what technology would be like at different points in time.
You know, whether predictions are exact to the year or not is less important than the general trend.
You know, the key threshold event that I see coming, you know, fairly soon in the next century, within, say, three decades, is the emergence of non-biological entities called the machines, but the concept of a machine will have a very different connotation than the 21st century does today.
because today a machine means something simple and formulaic.
Something like that, something like this.
In the future, machines will be more like people.
But nonetheless, machines, non-biological entities, will gain a level of intelligence equal to the flexibility and depth and breadth of human intelligence.
When that happens, they're going to combine that human flexibility and depth with some advantages they already have.
You said they are?
Are they going to do this on their own, or are we going to allow them to do this?
I guess it's a moral question in a way.
There almost seems to be an inevitability to it.
They will.
We're guiding this development now.
It's already a joint effort.
The first computers were designed entirely by humans.
Today, humans give the general design parameters, and most of the stages of development are worked out by a computer.
As we get into the next century, machines, like to say non-biological entities, will be designing their own next generations.
So it's already a collaborative effort.
Machines are not something apart from human civilization.
It's very much part of our civilization.
It's already extending the reach of our bodies and our minds.
And they will literally expand our minds as we go through the next century.
So it's not an alien invasion of intelligent machines.
We're already very intimate with our computers.
If all our computers stopped today, civilization will grind to a halt.
That wasn't true 25 years ago.
We're already putting intelligent machines in our bodies, in our brains, neural implants for Parkinson's disease, for deafness.
There's a chip placed in a paralyzed individual recently who can now communicate wirelessly just through mental, by thinking certain thoughts, communicate with his computer.
We're going to be putting, within 30 years, there'll be ubiquitous use of neural implants.
So it's not a matter that the machines are doing X and the humans are doing Y. It's very much an intimate
It's already true today, and it's going to be a very intimate connection as we go through the next several decades.
So it's very much a man-machine symbiosis.
But the premise has always been that the machine is created to serve man, mankind, right?
Serve and to extent.
And to extent.
So what you're projecting here, it seems to me, is
equal status and a lot of equals.
Right, but I mean, there's not going to be a clear distinction between human and machine.
I mean, you will have, first of all, very commonly humans who have intelligent machines in their bodies and brains, and ultimately that non-biological portion of the brain is going to grow because non-biological computation is growing exponentially.
I mean, it's doubling every year.
The biological
our biological intelligence is relatively at a standstill compared to that.
It's really not developing at all.
So as we start to put these intelligent machines in our brains, which won't necessarily require surgery.
I mean, they'll travel through our bloodstream.
We'll have microscopic computers that are ultimately of human brain capacity.
So we'll have a non-biological aspect to our bodies and brains
that aspect will grow exponentially.
So ultimately, it'll become dominant.
But these will still claim to be humans.
You'll also have other entities that are non-biological, that are completely non-biological, but that are copies of human brains.
Within 30 years, you'll be able to copy my brain and note down every single relevant detail, every synaptic cleft, every neurotransmitter strength, every inter-neuronal connection,
and basically reproduce precisely that whole process of Ray Kurzweil's brain in a neural computer.
Copy is a scary word, isn't it?
We talk about copies.
Are you using it in the clone sense?
The duplication sense, I wonder?
Not duplication atom by atom, but duplication in terms of
all of the functionality of the human brain as it pertains to thinking.
Take it as an analogy.
I mean, they're creating now an artificial pancreas.
Well, it's not built out of pancreatic cells.
It's, in fact, using a different methodology, but it will, just like the real pancreas, perform a function that's similar.
It will monitor in real time the blood and monitor it for insulin glucose levels,
and then create and administer glucose in a continuous fashion like a real pancreas.
Well, it's built very differently than the human brain, but it performs a similar function.
We're going to create analogs of human neurons that are not biological entities.
Much of the complexity of a human neuron is for its own structural support, its own attrition, its own reproduction, its own biological life processes.
It performs certain functions as an information processing entity that we can recreate.
In fact, we've already done that.
We've already created chips that recreate precisely substantial clusters of hundreds of human neurons.
And these are, you can call them computers, but they're very different than today's computers.
They're not digital.
They're digital and analog.
They're massively parallel.
And these are circuits that precisely reproduce exactly what those neurons do, not in terms of moving blood around, but in terms of its
information processing capability.
And we can look inside my brain today and see individual nerve cells.
We can see them fire.
Those scanning technologies are also getting more powerful with each generation.
The next generation will be able to see the connections between the neurons.
A future generation will be able to see the neurotransmitter strengths, which are the site of human learning.
And it's a conservative statement to say that 30 years from now, we would be able to look inside my brain
and see every relevant detail as it pertains to thinking.
The state of my memory, which is hundreds of trillions of neurotransmitter strength levels, every synaptic clef, and record all that in a big database.
It's trillions of bytes of information.
And then basically recreate that process, including the state of my memory and all my skills and everything that makes up my personality.
Be able to translate the data that's in there?
Will it be able to translate the data?
Or is this going to show blocks of data?
It's actually going to be able to... It's not translated, it's going to basically recreate an entity that is operating the same way.
It's going to copy it as a... It's going to copy those processes precisely.
Is there some way to read, you know, the... To understand how it works?
No, to take all of these thoughts in your brain and to get a printout as what this thought is.
You know, these are these words... That's not... That's actually not so trivial...
to do.
We could copy my brain without necessarily understanding the principles of its operation or how it works or what thoughts it's thinking, but just copy it as a massive amount of data.
Would it all be zeros and ones, basically?
Well, it's actually not digital.
It's not digital.
It's analog, but we can still copy it and reproduce it.
And we would then have another entity
that operates the same way as my brain.
And since it has a copy of my memories and skills, it would be very much like Ray Kurzweil.
I'd also be able to give him a body using nanotechnology.
So this new Ray Kurzweil would think that he was me because he'd have
the same memories, he would say.
Would he be fixed in place in terms of age?
You know, the very last words that you use in your timeline is that aging as we know it.
I'm paraphrasing here, but life expectancy is no longer a viable term in relation to intelligent people.
Right.
Well, this new Ray Kurzweil, since he would be built using a new thinking medium, has a shot at a form of immortality, so long as he's careful to make frequent backup copies.
I mean, there's actual real information in our brains, and it's trillions of bytes of information.
And when our hardware crashes, that's it.
That information dies.
We don't preserve it.
One of the advantages of machine intelligence is that the state of memory of a non-biological entity can be captured and retained and preserved and recreated.
Computers can share their knowledge.
If I spend years learning French, I can't just download that to you.
But machines can do that.
They can take the state of their understanding and knowledge and just download it to another machine.
So when one machine learns something, it can transfer that knowledge and insight to trillions of other machines instantly.
So ultimately, all of these non-biological entities can be a master of all human knowledge.
They could have read all of human literature and mastered it all.
They appreciate it, though.
That's the question.
Yes, I mean, because these are going to be recreations of human intelligence.
So they're going to be human-like, and they're going to have human opinions and human emotional reactions.
They'll be just like humans.
Some of them will be copies of specific humans.
Some will be, I think, a more likely scenario is they'll be copies in general of human intelligence, but changed in certain, modified in certain ways.
The point being what, though, just out of curiosity?
The point being that this is the best example we have of an intelligent entity.
So reverse engineering the human brain, understanding how it works, and then emulating the intelligence of human beings in a non-biological entity is the best way to create an intelligent entity.
And this is the whole thrust of our technological progress, is creating...
machines that are intelligent.
To serve us, though, generally.
To expand our civilization.
I mean, this is going to be part of human civilization.
This is kind of the next step in evolution.
So this whole discussion that I've been following for the last couple of years about books and libraries, it really... I know you're totally trivial, isn't it?
It's irrelevant, it seems to me.
Well, it's one step in the process of transferring kind of our natural world into...
into a technological substrate.
I mean, books, that's fairly soon on the horizon.
So there's no doubt in your mind about that.
I mean, all of the debate going on about the future of the codex and the printed book, I would sense that it probably amuses you when you see these debates going on.
Well, I mean, I talked about the life cycle of
of the technology.
And I talk about the different stages, and one stage is called the pretenders, where an upstart threatens to eclipse the older technologies.
Enthusiasts prematurely predict victory while providing some benefits to new technologies found to be missing as a key element of functionality and quality, when it indeed fails to dislodge the established order of the technology conservatives.
Take this as evidence that the original approach will indeed live forever, but this is usually short-lived to victory for the aging technology.
And another example is a print book, a rather mature technology today.
It's now in the stage of the Pretenders with the software-based virtual book as the Pretender.
Lacking the resolution, contrast, lack of flick, and other visual quality of paper, the current generation of virtual books does not have the capability of displacing paper-based publications.
But this victory will be short-lived as future generations of computer displays succeed in providing a fully satisfactory alternative to paper.
And I've seen displays in laboratories that are really of the quality of paper.
They're coming.
Well, I mean, is it going to be like this?
Are you going to turn a page?
And I've seen the book, the e-book that they have over at the MIT media level.
Yeah, but it's something crude.
And it's going to be each page is like a screen, and it has a texture of paper, I guess.
So that's how they're designing it.
They still haven't got it yet.
That's what they're projecting.
I wonder if they're missing the point.
Why are they trying to replicate the shape and the heft in the form of a printed book?
I think you're suggesting a hundred years from now, this is just going to be totally history.
A hundred years from now, we'll be able to bypass this kind of language, but it's a step on the way.
Ten years from now, everyone's going to be carrying around computers of this size or less.
They'll be very thin.
The screens will be extremely high quality.
They'll be wireless.
So you can just, you know, download any kind of information, music, books, movies, right to your little notebook computer.
But the notebook computer won't be a six-pound hefty thing.
We'll run out of gas in two hours.
No, we're making a lot of progress in batteries.
But it'll be, you know, it weighs six ounces.
It'll be this size.
And you'll be able to read on it.
It'll be the same quality as paper.
People really will go away from paper.
Over the next decade, yeah.
You didn't predict that in your last book, though, did you?
Yeah, no, I did talk about that.
Did you predict that it would be gone in 10 years?
I think that my predictions there were pretty much on track with what I would predict now, that paper would not be obsolete by the end of the 1990s, but as we go to the first decade of the next century, displays will begin to displace paper.
But in terms of
But intelligent machines is the whole thrust of our technology, and it's not one phenomenon happening in many different places in many different ways.
Machine is really the word of choice for you.
The word computer, I guess, has had its specific time.
It's kind of an inequitism now, is that right?
Well, I do use it in the subtitle.
But in the conversation you've been talking about machines.
Right, because I'm sensitive to people who have a conception of computer as something similar to the architecture of today's computers.
And a lot of the criticism of artificial intelligence is a criticism of a specific way of building a machine, which is programming it through logical rules, sort of spoon-feeding every little bit of knowledge in a logical structure.
Then the claim is, and then the assertion is, or the criticism is, you can't build something of human-level intelligence that way.
And that's true.
I mean, I agree with that.
But that's not the only way to build a machine.
There's an assumption that computers have to be that way.
And we can build computers the same way the human brain is built.
The human brain is a physical entity.
It's a very complex one, but it's not infinitely complex.
We already understand how substantial
clusters of neurons work, and the brain is made up of 100 billion neurons.
It's not a number that's beyond our fascinating.
We have devices today that have hundreds of billions of things in them.
We can manage that level of complexity.
The human brain combines digital and analog methods, but we can do that in machines.
It's massively parallel, and there's 100 trillion calculations going on at the same time.
And it's not programmed with logical rules.
We have less than a million neurons that are devoted to sort of rational thinking.
most of our brain is devoted to pattern recognition, which is a sort of chaotic process where you have the unpredictable interaction of millions of little processes going on simultaneously, and a solution kind of emerges in a self-organizing way.
And it's a certain paradigm that, in fact, I've been using in my work with pattern recognition.
We can build machines that use these sort of complexity theory methods where you have the interplay of lots of parallel processes
And a solution emerges from their interaction.
And that is how we're going to be building machines.
And we're going to be building them guided by our insights into the human brain.
There's a very extensive research effort in hundreds of places going on to probe the human brain and understand how it works.
And we've already used those insights in our work in speech recognition, for example.
I bought a speech recognition software a couple years ago at IBM, which I found
most unsatisfactory, I have to say.
To transcribe these tapes, I have this on tape.
Two years is a long time in this field.
The software today and two years ago is quite different.
There are three main speech recognition programs.
There's MIND, the one that came from my company, Kurzweil Applied Intelligence, which is now the Dictation Division of Learnout and House Feet.
I sold that company to on Husby a year and a half ago.
What's that called?
Is that something that you can load into a regular computer?
Yeah, it's a competitor to IBM Beer Voice.
It's Voice Express, and I used it to dictate the book, actually.
So you dictated the book?
Most of it, yeah.
All right.
Voice Express?
Yeah, there's no E. Voice Express, X, P-R-E-S-S.
And we can talk to it like this, and it will... Right.
It's not like this that I have to talk?
No.
All the speech recognition's gone beyond that barrier like a year ago.
And the other competitors are Dragon and IBM.
They've all come a long way in the last year, even.
Good.
Well, what I'm hopeful is that at some point you'll have a voice recognition that I could take a tape like this and it could actually do the give and take.
Would I have to train this thing for several hours just to pick up my voice?
Wouldn't it be nice if... Well, you train it for about 40 minutes.
Yeah.
You speak some sentences.
In fact, they're going to be using the prologue to my book in a new version.
Is that right?
Yeah.
Good.
So you have a new version coming out soon?
Oh, there's always a new version.
The Voice Express Pro is the latest version.
Pro, right?
Good.
I'm buying a new computer shortly, because everything you have is
As you say, forget it.
Well, it's part of the accelerating pace.
I mean, people are now starting to notice the acceleration of computation, but it's been going on for a century.
But it's the nature of exponential growth that people don't even notice exponential growth for a long time, and then suddenly it explodes.
And that's happening now.
And computers are still a million times simpler than the human brain.
The human brain does a hundred trillion things at a time.
Each neuron
Each interneuronal connection is very slow, only does about 200 calculations per second.
So 100 trillion times 200 is 20 million billion.
And that's a million times faster than our fastest computers because of the massive parallelism.
And that difference of a million is the difference between the rich, subtle behavior of humans and the relatively brittle behavior of computers.
But that factor of a million is going to dissolve over the next
20 years.
By 2019, a thousand dollar computer will match the human brain in capacity.
By 2030, it'll be equal to a thousand human brains.
Okay, that's the hardware.
I agree that just having the hardware capacity doesn't automatically give you human level intelligence, but that's where the reverse engineering of the human brain comes in.
I mean, we're well down the path of probing, scanning, and reverse engineering the human brain to understand
the secrets of intelligence, and then using those insights to organize these vast computational resources.
When was the word computer first used?
Do we know who actually... If you look at some of these old movies, they show you these big, you know, they're as big as rooms, and they call them electronic brains.
I'm wondering where the word computer actually... Look at Dan Ever-Bush.
He didn't call it.
In that famous essay in The Atlantic, never once uses the word computer in there, all these other words.
That's a good question.
I'm not sure of the answer to that.
I'm curious.
I'd love to find it.
What did Turing use?
I'll check it out, but I'm sure it's not computing.
Computer.
I'd love to know who's credited for it.
The OED isn't really... I actually should check the OED and see what they say, but I think the computer will go back earlier than the machines, you know?
they just find the first reference.
I think they used the term in the 50s, but I'm not sure exactly who used it first.
Interesting to know.
And is that a good word for it, computer?
Not really, because right from that word computer comes a lot of misconceptions about the capabilities of this kind of device, because people assume that it just computes, which is to say it just calculates, and it does, it performs
sort of rote, predictable sequences of calculations.
So people figure, well, of course, it's very good at calculating, but you can never really think in an intuitive way, and there's something qualitatively different about what humans do and what a computer can do.
Computers can only do what you program them to do.
They'll never do anything surprising to their programmer.
And none of that's true.
I mean, there are processes going on in the human brain.
I mean, it is a physical entity.
And those processes can be understood and can be replicated in a non-biological mechanism.
And don't call it a computer, because I think these entities are going to be, we're going to design them very differently than today's computers.
They're going to be, the emphasis is going to be on pattern recognition, which is self-organizing processes, highly parallel, where information is stored as a pattern throughout a region as opposed to
being stored in a tight logical data structure.
But computers are really very flexible.
You can emulate with a computer these chaotic processes and recreate them.
Well, chaos theory is pretty central to you, to what you write here, and then you actually kind of go counter to it in any respect, too much.
Well, I mean, chaos theory, so-called, which is, say, computing methods that are not
predictable where solutions emerge from the interplay of millions of little processes is a better paradigm for understanding the human brain.
Our brain is not logically organized.
It's highly redundant.
None of the neurons are individually important.
Processes occur because of patterns of information.
But we have a lot of paradigms already, neural nets.
evolutionary algorithms, Markov models, and there are others that also have similar properties.
And when we actually build our hardware in a massively parallel fashion, we'll be able to give much greater power to those methods.
I remember there was a time when people were saying that the great discovery of the 20th century was the unlocking of the atom.
And that's probably not the case anymore.
It's probably the invention of the microchip.
Uh, computation, the emergence of computation, uh, is the most powerful, it's by far the most powerful, uh, discovery, uh, although actually it was discovered in the nineteenth century.
I mean, Babbage, Babbage's computer is very modern design.
I think your computer isn't as the first one.
Right.
Uh, he called it the analytical engine.
And you can recreate the world through this kind of computation.
And in fact, it has infiltrated every sphere of human endeavor.
My father was a musician.
He died in 1970.
And if you wanted to hear his multi-instrumental orchestration, he had to raise money, hire an orchestra, rent a room, write out handwritten scores, run it off on the mimeograph machine.
And finally you get to hear his damn composition.
Then if you wanted to change it, you'd have to dismiss the musicians and rewrite the scores, raise more money.
Paying them very expensive over time.
You know, now a teenager in her bedroom can hear her orchestral composition just on her bed and change it and modify it like one would edit a letter on a word processor.
You predict in here that machines will be producing works of art?
writing, I guess, will follow at some point.
What's the point?
What is the point of art produced by a machine, when art, by definition, is creative expression of a human?
I mean, I don't say anyone would be interested in a painting done by a machine.
Maybe I'm just a little too old-fashioned on that.
I think one of the main messages of the book is that there's not going to be a clear distinction between you and a machine.
machines are going to become as complex as humans.
And lovable?
Yes, I mean, that's... I'm not making fun, I'm just asking... No, I think that's a good question, because I think being lovable or displaying emotions, creativity, intuition, these sort of softer qualities of human beings, is the ultimate of human intelligence.
It's not that... Intelligence is not being a great mathematician.
The ultimate of human intelligence is...
our personalities, our ability to handle emotion, uh, to be emotional, uh, to be lovable, to recognize and respond to joy and sadness and, uh... That's fine, don't worry about me, I'm just waiting for the... I'll blink if I don't know what you're gonna... No, no, that's fine.
Why is it not gonna be green light there?
Um... The machines own computers that stick, right?
This is the ultimate in human intelligence.
Those qualities require an entity that's immensely complex to achieve that level of subtlety and gentleness.
Those qualities is the cutting edge of human intelligence, and it's a necessary byproduct of something that's as complex and subtle and deep and rich as a human being.
as our non-biological entities achieve that level of complexity and subtlety, they will have those kinds of qualities.
And at least in some measure, they will be built in man's image because that is the best source we have of creating intelligence and then surpassing it once we master its secrets.
If you achieve, recreate a human-like brain, you can extend its memory a million-fold and you can make it
a lot faster, and you can extend it in many ways.
I mean, right now, we're stuck in a brain of only a hundred trillion connections.
In the next century, there'd be no reason for our minds to stay so small.
Our minds.
Yeah.
So does it bother you that you won't be here?
Or maybe you will be here 100 years from now to see this.
Do you think maybe you were born 30 years too soon or 40 years too soon?
I did write a health book.
I'll give you a copy of it.
Because we do have to keep our carbon cell-based bodies and brains going a little bit longer.
But even if I were around, it's not clear to me that you and I, even if we stayed very healthy, have the opportunity to enjoy that kind of longevity.
Because if you do the mental experiment, let's say I'm sleeping and you scan my brain 20, 30,
And then you reinstantiate it, and there's a new Ray Kurzweil, and he's got a body.
What was that word again?
You re what?
Re-instantiate.
Re-instantiate, okay.
Now, if you were to meet the new Ray Kurzweil, you'd be convinced that this is, well, someone very much like Ray Kurzweil, because he'll act just like Ray Kurzweil.
Would the new Ray Kurzweil need glasses?
Well, the... Maybe that's a stupid question, but maybe the new Ray, to eliminate imperfections.
Right, that would be an easy imperfection to eliminate.
That would really be simple.
And that would be a temptation to go down that path.
We may end up throwing the baby out with the bathwater by the time we get done throwing out the quote of imperfections.
I mean, that sort of engineering does lead, you know.
Right, but we're doing that now.
I mean, we do try to overcome imperfections.
There is, in fact, the surgery that claims to overcome the need for glasses.
It's more controversial, but I mean, we do apply technology to overcoming
imperfections.
So the new Ray Kurzweil probably would not need glasses.
But now that, Ray Kurzweil being in a non-biological medium, is more of a software entity, because that mind file doesn't need to be discarded when that hardware crashes or gets ported to some new personal computer.
I mean, when I go from one personal computer to another, I don't throw all my files away.
I copy them.
And similarly,
you know, the mind files of these non-biological entities will survive the demise of the hardware substrates.
Well, that's arguable, though, isn't it?
I mean, one of the big... Well, it is arguable because that has not given me immortality.
Because if you came to me and said, well, Ray, good news, we've successfully reinstantiated your body and brain.
We don't need this old body and brain.
I'd say, wait a second.
Right, exactly.
That reasoning is flawed.
You know, good luck to that guy, but that's not me.
I'm still here.
So having done that mental experiment shows that my consciousness has not leaped somehow to this new entity.
If you did it in one step, you kind of copied in a destructive manner the information and ported it destructively to this new person,
and then you met the new person, he would say, well, I was worried about this operation, but you know, it really worked, you know, and I'm still here, and this is great, and I'm now in this much more capable body and brain, and I'm really glad I did this.
Well, he's glad he did that, because he wouldn't even exist if it hadn't happened.
But that's equivalent to having scanned, you know, the old Jack, copied him into the new Jack, and then destroyed the, or murdered the old Jack.
Well, so,
So I don't really see this as a way that I personally can gain immortality.
But if you look at it from a different vantage point, which is the vantage point of sort of human civilization, these new entities do have a reality, and their reality is more of a software reality than a hardware reality.
But what happens when the operating systems change?
We hear today about the need to migrate
data.
You have these punched cards from 30 years ago that are worthless.
There are no machines to read them.
You have all this data on these cards, but nobody can read it.
You talk about all this Viking space probe stuff that's worthless now.
It's actually a real issue that we're finding that data does not have a huge longevity in terms of
kind of substrate it's on, because the technology is transforming so quickly that, you know, if you have even... And wouldn't it be an irony if this is around 100 years from now, which it will be, by the way.
I mean, when I ask you to sign it, it'll be an artifact.
I have a collection of these artifacts, and I'm reasonably confident, you know, unless there's some... Well, you bring up a very good point.
That will be around 100 years from now, and
We have not solved this problem with regard to data.
I mean, in theory, data can last forever, but you constantly have to port it.
Because if I have, let's say, a backup tape that was done on a personal computer 10 years ago, it's not so long ago.
Lots of luck.
I know this.
In my first book, all my interviews were on these big five-inch... Yeah, find the tape drive, find the computer it ran on, the operating system, get all that stuff to actually work.
And then hope the disks haven't degraded at the same time.
Right, right.
Information actually has to be constantly... Migrated.
Migrated.
Refreshed.
I mean, I know all these words.
This is a very interesting book I'm working on.
I wonder, when I read a book like this, if I'm wasting my time, you know?
I mean, here I am trying to see where we're going with print culture and machine culture and, you know, look at books.
The things that we call books have changed constantly over 5,000 years.
And, I mean, it's a vehicle for the knowledge, I guess, is the...
Right.
I mean, data does have to be migrated, and to accept that the mind of the brain and its state of an entity like this is data, it'll have to be migrated as well.
But it then has a reality as software as opposed to hardware.
So are these machines going to come up?
Are we just going to have confidence that these machines are going to come up with
strategies to preserve the data?
Well, ultimately, software doesn't have to stay on one computer.
I mean, it can migrate on a network.
I mean, the World Wide Web is going to merge into a sort of a computing medium where computing can be done anywhere in the web, and we're moving towards that already.
Things like the Sun Jenny proposal where
You have a program, and suddenly, for a certain period of time, it needs 10,000 computers to work on it.
You can just go out, and it'll soak up the unused computers of computers on the web.
And computing will be fairly transferable from one machine to another, and you won't necessarily run your programs on your computer.
They'll just kind of run out on the network.
I think one major question, and I realize we're probably going into it,
time that's very precious to you, but the whole concept of reading as we know it is going to disappear.
We're not going to read the way we read now letters.
Well, that's some decades off.
I mean, you do suggest things like that.
Yeah, by the end of the century, I think that's true, because once you're in another type of entity, then we already have ways of representing knowledge in computers that don't have to go through human language.
Reading.
But I mean, reading, which is an embodiment of written language, is not going to go away soon.
As more and more of the thinking of our civilization is done on a non-biological
medium, then written language will become less important.
We'll have more powerful ways of transferring knowledge more quickly.
I mean, right now, you have, let's say, 20 million billion calculations per second being done by human brain, 10 billion human brains.
So you have a certain amount of thinking being done in a biological medium.
And if you look at all of the
So computation being done on computers, it's a very trivial fraction of that.
However, that non-biological computation, which is going to become more complex and more chaotic and more intelligent, but the quantity of it is going to grow exponentially, whereas the quantity of thinking being done in the biological medium is basically flat.
So I've been asked to participate in a seminar next year at the American Library Association in Chicago, and the subject is
Are all libraries going to be museums and are all books, every book, going to be objects?
Yeah, it's just a question of how quickly.
And you think that's probably the case?
Oh, absolutely.
Yeah, I mean, one could argue about the time frame, but it's not long.
I would say ten years.
Certainly 15, the majority of reading will be done not on paper, probably 10 years.
You get out to 20 years and reading on paper will be relatively rare and will have reported most of the paper information to electronic form.
And reading on electronic displays will not be like it is today, which is basically not satisfactory for sustained reading.
But that problem, I mean, it's already been solved in laboratories, and there's a certain amount of time for these technologies to migrate out from laboratories into the real world.
But certainly ten years from now, you'll have a device about the size of your pad, you know, maybe a little bit larger screen.
You'll be doing most of your reading on that.
And, you know, all these paper documents have to get scanned in.
Of course, most of them being produced now exist electronically in one form or another.
Just on the research level, I'm wondering about works of art, literary things, poetry, novels.
I still wonder if there's a place for this kind of expression.
Well, a book is a nice physical artifact that's an artwork, and people will continue to appreciate it.
You know, of course, I mean, I talk about technology reaching the stage of antiquity,
We still like mechanical typewriters, horses and buggies, vinyl records, harpsichords.
I mean, they don't disappear.
They're nice artifacts, and books have a long, rich history, and people will prize physical books.
But that doesn't mean that the vast majority of reading won't be done on a tarp.
Do you shave with an electric razor, or do you use a regular razor?
I use the Mach 3 Gillette.
Yeah, I do too.
Why?
Because it's better.
Well, it's a very good technology.
I spent hundreds of millions of dollars developing that.
But there are some things that are superior, though, it seems to me.
You know, the electric razor was supposed to mean the end of the world.
Well, Mach 3 is probably the most advanced technology.
I mean, the most money is spent on it.
It's not a primitive technology.
I use it myself, and it's wonderful.
One pass.
We could talk all day.
This is good stuff.
I think, you know, an hour is good for...
Would you sign this for me?
Sure, I'd be happy to.
You don't write in the traditional manner you dictate, is that right?
Right, but I'm still creating written text.
I do have another question for you.
Is the whole concept of a document a sacred document pass?
Did you see that piece in the New York Times last week?
The heroic efforts that are being undertaken to
preserved with modern technology, the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution, our foundation documents.
Why isn't a copy, in that sense, satisfactory?
Well, the copies are satisfactory for lots of purposes, but there's only one original.
That's right.
You just said a very interesting thing.
There's only one original.
Is that whole concept about to disappear?
Will there always be an original?
It doesn't have to be a declaration of independence or a constitution?
Well, it's just a distinction.
It may be a distinction without a difference.
I mean, our copying technologies, in fact, are imperfect.
The nature of technology, I mean, technology does not spring from labor into creation with perfect capabilities and qualities from day one.
In fact, it's not the nature of technology.
Technology emerges very imperfect, and very gradually gets better and better.
So, I mean, generally in artificial intelligence, when something's first introduced, people say, well, that's not a big deal, because it doesn't work, like speech recognition.
It's a lot of hype, but, you know, you try it out, and it doesn't work.
It gradually gets better and better and better.
Finally, it works, and you say, well, that's not a big deal.
We've been talking about that for, you know, ten years.
Well, it'll be very interesting.
I will have had a... So copying technologies, I mean, our copies are pretty imperfect, however,
I actually have got these oil paintings recently that are computer major copies of Masters.
And they're not perfect, but they're pretty damn good.
But, you know, our copying technologies can get better and better.
These old documents are three-dimensional documents.
Why would somebody like Bill Gates pay $30 million for the Codex Western?
when he could have a perfect digital copy?
Why is it necessary?
I don't think there's any intellectual reason for it.
There's just a distinction to being that there's only one original, and so supply and demand has a high value.
Will that kind of thinking continue, do you think?
Or who knows, right?
Well, I think it's, for example, these old painting copies,
It's a computer and a laser.
It creates a three-dimensional copy.
And it's a very good technology.
So even the brushstrokes are what I'm thinking?
Oh, yeah.
You can see the brushstrokes and feel them.
I mean, it's a three-dimensional reproduction.
And there is a question there.
Does that devalue the originals?
Well, it does, because it used to be only the original really looked like the original.
The copies really were inferior.
I'm not so sure.
I don't think it devalues the original.
You think it does?
Probably not.
Why would somebody, and this person in my view is a fool, but why would somebody spend $250,000 for the fake pearls once worn by Jackie Onassis, which you can buy at retail for $40?
Because there is some sort of context there.
If this is the original by Monet or whomever, I still think it has that resonance to it of having been created by the artist.
It's certainly something I can write about.
People have talked about archiving the web, because it's an important historical, socio-historical archive of the state of our civilization, at a particular point in time.
It might be very interesting, in the year 2015, to look back and say, well, what was on the web on February 12, 1999?
But it's actually very difficult to do that, because the web is not just a bunch or billions of static pages.
Lots of these pages are, in fact, windows into massive databases where information is kind of computed on the fly.
On a lot of websites, there's streaming video and audio information, and there's no way you could archive all that.
I mean, if, for example, one web page was... There's no way you could archive it.
Right.
If a web page is an entry into a database, you can't
just copy that database.
It wouldn't even allow you to do that.
You can maybe look up certain little pieces of information, but behind that is this massive database.
Increasingly, webpages are not the sort of static pages that you could just copy like that.
Do you read novels?
I have, unfortunately.
I do need some.
It's a novelist.
Is that right?
Alan Kurzweil.
Oh, sure.
Case of curiosity.
Yep, I've interviewed him.
Young man.
I like that book.
It had an antiquarian texture to it, that book.
It's about a... Yeah, exactly.